Rework Chapter "Value-Only serialization" + editorial changes (#375)
admin-shell-io/aas-specs: documentation/IDTA-01001/modules/ROOT/pages/includes/IDTA-01001_ValueOnly.adoc

A submodel element is omitted if no value is defined for it for the requesting submodel or submodel element.

==== Grammar Value-Only Serialization

In the following the grammar for Value-Only serialization is defined in a formal way:

[listing]
....

<value-only-of-Submodel> ::= 
    <value-only-of-SubmodelElementCollection>

<value-only-of-sme> ::= 
    <value-only-of-SubmodelElementCollection> | <value-only-of-SubmodelElementList> | 
    <value-only-of-DataElement> | <value-only-of-RelationshipElement> | 
    <value-only-of-AnnotatedRelationshipElement> | <value-only-of-Entity> | 
    <value-only-of-BasicEvent>

<value-only-of-DataElement> ::=  
    <value-only-of-Property> | <value-only-of-MultiLanguageProperty> | 
    <value-of-Range> | <value-of-ReferenceElement> |  
    <value-only-of-File> | <value-only-of-Blob> 

<value-only-of-SubmodelElementCollection> ::=
     '{' 
        {<jd><idShort-of-sme><jd>':' <value-only-of-sme>','}*  
         <jd><idShort-of-sme><jd>':' <value-only-of-sme>
        |
        ''
     '}'

<value-only-of-SubmodelElementList> ::= 
    '[' 
       {<value-only-of-sme>','}* 

> 	    <value-only-of-sme> | 

Author: ok

<value-of-Range> ::= 
	value of Range/min or Range/max, resp. 
	with data type as specified in Range/valueType

<value-Reference> ::= 
    '{'
       '"type":' <value-of-Reference-type>','
       '"keys":' <value-of-Reference-keys>
    '}'

<idShort-of-sme> ::= 
	value of SubmodelElement/idShort

<language-tag> ::= 
	language tag as defined for values of type langString, i.e.
	in accordance with IETF https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5646#page-5[RFC 5646], the language names match the following regular expression:

		^[a-z]\{2,4}(-[A-Z][a-z]\{3})?(-([A-Z]\{2}|[0-9]\{3}))?$
	
	e.g. "en" for Englisch

<value-of-Reference-type> ::= 
	value of Reference/type

<value-of-Reference-keys> ::= 
	"Normal" JSON serialization of list of elements of type Key

<value-of-specificAssetIds> ::= 
	"Normal" JSON serialization of list of elements of type SpecificAssetId

<value-string> ::= 
	value of type string with delimiters '"', e.g. "this is my string"

<value-PathType> ::= 
	value of type PathType

<value-BlobType> ::= 
	value of type BlobType

<value-Identifier> ::= 
	value of type Identifier

<jd> ::= 
	<json-delimiter>  

<sd> ::= 
	<string-delimiter>  

> <json-delimiter> ::= 

Reviewer: Conflate with `<jd>` definition - only have one of both and do not "chain" them together. This just complicates things more than necessary. Maybe even remove them completely and use literals `'"'` instead

Author: removed

Values are only available for

* All subtypes of abstract type _DataElement_,
* SubmodelElementList and SubmodelElementCollection, resp. and for their included SubmodelElements,
* ReferenceElement,
* RelationshipElement + AnnotatedRelationshipElement,
* Entity,
* BasicEventElement,
* Submodel.

Capabilities are excluded from the Value-Only serialization scope since only data containing elements are in the focus. They are consequently omitted in the serialization.

> The Value-Only Format does not contain Metadata attributes (see xref:IDTA-01001_Mappings.adoc#format-metadata-metadata-serialization[Metadata Attributes]). So the serialization contains the value-related data, only and ignored the metadata:

Author: ok

[[table-value-data-attributes]]
.Value-Only Attributes
[%autowidth, width="100%", cols="48%,52%",options="header",]
|===
|*Class Name* |*Fields for Value-Only representationfootnote:[ attribute in parenthesis (like e.g. (value)) means that the attribute name is not displayed, only its Value-Only serialization. 
For the other attributes the attribute itself will be part of the serialization]*
2+|*Identifiables*

> |AssetAdministrationShell a|assetInformation, submodels

Author: removed attributes and added note that there is no serialization. If needed we can introduce it later.

Why assetInformation used in valueOnly : because the rest is Metainformation. We cannot change it because of backward compatibility. I added footnote for it.

> |AssetAdministrationShell a|assetInformation, submodels

Reviewer: It seems it did mix up things and you are correct, assetInformation is **not** part of metadata serialization and therefore there is no contradiction in having it as part of valueOnly serialization.

However, I still recommend removing this section completely if it is not used because it is just cluttering the document without bringing any benefits. If kept, I propose to move assetInformation to the metadata serialization format instead of valueOnly as I would argue this data is rather considered metadata than a value.

In the end, if you really insist on keeping things as-are, I could also live with that as it has no actual effect because it is never used.

> |AssetAdministrationShell a|assetInformation, submodels

Author: I would not agree that assetInformation is metadata in the senses of $metadata: alle data in AAS is metadata in some sense but some are metadata for the asset being represented (assetInformation) and some for the AAS as object created by a data provider etc. (like e.g. versioning).

> |AssetAdministrationShell a|assetInformation, submodels

Reviewer: I get your point. However, if the idea is to divide all properties into either metadata or value, I would consider `assetInformation` to rather be metadata than value.

|Submodel a| (submodelElements)

====

> Qualifiers are ignored. This also holds for qualifiers of kind "ValueQualifier".

Author: This is true

====

|*SubmodelElements* a| 

====

> Qualifiers are ignored. This also holds for qualifiers of kind "ValueQualifier".

Author: no, the note above was for submodels, this is for submodel elements

====

|SubmodelElementCollection a| (value) 

====
If the collection contains submodel elements of type

>  Operation or Capability: these are ignored in the Value-Only serialization

Author: I am not sure: Operation and capability do not have a Value-Only serialization but this could also mean that if a collection contains them the complete collection is not serialized. But here it is stated that they are ignored and the rest is serialized. I think this needs to be clarified.

>  Operation or Capability: these are ignored in the Value-Only serialization

Reviewer: Indeed, it needs to be defined what is the expected result when a collection is empty or only contains elements that are not serializable. 
My suggestion would be that they could be omitted, i.e. empty elements are optional.

However, duplicating the information that Operation and Capability are not serializable for valueOnly is not really helpful. I suggest changing the test to something similar to
> If a SubmodelElementCollection is empty or contains only SubmodelElements that have no valueOnly serialization, serializing the SubmodelElementCollection may be omitted.

>  Operation or Capability: these are ignored in the Value-Only serialization

Author: I added issue https://github.com/admin-shell-io/aas-specs-api/issues/270 for this discussion.

The discussion with the empty collection seems to be the same as in https://github.com/admin-shell-io/aas-specs/pull/375#discussion_r1558986741

I think a collection cannot be empty in the sense that a value is missing. It is valid that are not SubmodelElements in the collection but I would display it  as an empty object because this is what was defined by the data provider. In the Normal-Serialization "value" could be ommitted but not the collection itself. It would be part of the Value-Only serialization of the Submodel. So it is different to Capability or Operation that are always "empty" w.r.t. this understanding.

if defined: type equal to SubmodelElementList/valueTypeListElement

====
If the submodel element list is part the Value-Only serialization of its parent element (e.g. in the context of a submodel or submodel element collection) and the list consists of submodel elements of type Operation or Capability the complete list is ignored. 

If the Value-Only serialization of the list is explicitly requested without context a corresponding error message shall be returned. 
====

|Entity |statements, globalAssetId, specificAssetId
|BasicEventElement a|observed
|Capability a| -
|Operation a| -

====
There is not Value-Only serialization for an Operation. However, a Value-Only serialization is useful for its arguments when executing the operation (see Value-Only serialization of "OperationVariable")
====

|RelationshipElement a|first, second
|AnnotatedRelationshipElement a|first, second, annotations

2+|*DataElements*
|Property a| (value)

type equal to Property/valueType

====
valueId is ignored in Value-Only serialization
====
|MultilanguageProperty a| (value)

====
valueId is ignored in Value-Only serialization
====
|Range a|min, max

type equal to Range/valueType

====

> In the Value-Only serialization only number ranges are supported

Author: It was specified like this in the previsous version in Part 2.
For me also Ranges only make sense with Numbers. But in Part 1 we allow any xsd type from DataTypeDefXsd.
It would be backward compatible to change this in the Value-Only Schema. We should discuss it.

> In the Value-Only serialization only number ranges are supported

Reviewer: We discussed this issue yesterday in the API workstream and decided Part 1 is correct and valueOnly serialization should be updated accordingly.

> In the Value-Only serialization only number ranges are supported

Author: ok, change needs to be done

====

|ReferenceElement a|(value)

|Blob a|value, contentType
|File a|value, contentType

2+|*Data Types*
|OperationVariable a| (value)

|MultiLanguageTextType a| The value of this type is identicial to its "Normal"-format serialization: it consists of a list of pairs: a language tag and the value in the corresponding language

[listing]
....

> <language-tag> ::= 

Author: this is true but it can be repeated here ?

	language tag as defined for values of type langString, i.e.
	in accordance with IETF https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5646#page-5[RFC 5646], 
	the language names match the following regular expression:

		^[a-z]\{2,4}(-[A-Z][a-z]\{3})?(-([A-Z]\{2}|[0-9]\{3}))?$
	
....	

	e.g. "en" for Englisch
|===

> A submodel element is omitted if no value is defined for it for the requesting submodel or submodel element.

Author: I do expect "tons of empty elements" for optional elements. This is why they are optional. As far as I remember there was a decision to remove them from the payload. And the sentence shall reflect this decision.l

> A submodel element is omitted if no value is defined for it for the requesting submodel or submodel element.

Reviewer: It seems like how to handle empty elements is one of the most important question. This especially becomes important when thinking about serialization of SubmodelElementLists.

What is the valueOnly serialization of a SubmodelElementList containing 2 properties, first one is empty, second one is not. Omitting empty values this would result in 
```JSON
[
   "some value"
]
```

and it would be impossible to tell if `some value` is the value of the first or second element in the list.

Omitting every empty element could lead to somewhat strange result, e.g. a submodel containing multiple collections, each only containing elements with empty value would just be serialized to an completely empty string following this logic. Not sure if that is what I would expect.

Furthermore, I do not have the feeling that having "tons of empty elements" would be a realistic problem because there are also parameters like level which allows to limit the depth of the returned structure. 

Not sure what is the best solution here but just enforcing all empty elements to be omitted obviously causes problems.

> A submodel element is omitted if no value is defined for it for the requesting submodel or submodel element.

Author: I added issue https://github.com/admin-shell-io/aas-specs/issues/398 to request 

`For of Property within a Submodel with kind=Instance Property/value shall be defined.`

`For of MultiLanguageProperty within a Submodel with kind=Instance MultiLanguageProperty/value shall be defined.`

> A submodel element is omitted if no value is defined for it for the requesting submodel or submodel element.

Reviewer: I agree that there might be some misunderstanding regarding the term *optional* because it may refer to the meta-model or to JSON. My primary issue is that we agree on a JSON serialization and once we have that we can write the rules how to generate it.

Regarding Property valueOnly serialization, what is the correct/expected JSON output for serializing a submodel (idShort *submodel*) that contains a SubmodelElementCollection (idShort *collection*) which again contains a single Property with idShort *property* and no value?

A simplified version of regular JSON serialization could look like this
```JSON
{
	"modelType": "Submodel",
	"idShort": "submodel",	
	"submodelElements": [
		{
			"modelType": "SubmodelElementCollection"
			"idShort": "collection",
			"value": [
				{
					"modelType": "Property",
					"idShort": "property",
					"valueType": "xs:string"					
				}
			]
		}
	]	
}
```

I can think of the following possible results

1. 
```JSON
{
    "collection": {
        "property": null
    }
}
```
2. 
```JSON
{
    "collection" : { }
}
```
3. 
```JSON
{ }
```
4. 
```JSON
null
```

At first glance, only the first option looks viable to me because of the issue with SumodelElementLists as discussed in an earlier comment.
Using this to deduct serialization rules from it, this would imply that all values have to be serialized at all times resp. `null` to be used to indicate a value is not present.

> ==== How-To Value-Only Serialization

Reviewer: This definition is better than the previous one but I have the feeling this could still be improved.
Maybe it could make sense to introduce different types of element, e.g.  (rules apply recursively)

- primitive: will be directly serialized as value
   - `Property`
- complex: will be serialized using default serialization
   - `Reference` (actually, I am not sure if this is not correct because the valueOnly serialization of a reference probably does not include e.g. referredSemanticId but this is actually undefined right now I would say)
   - `MultiLanguageProperty`?
   - `Blob`?
   - `File`?
- composite: serialized as JSON object using properties defined in above table in the format "idshort": {value}
   - `Submodel`
   - `SubmodelElementCollection`
   - `Entity`
   - ...
- SubmodelElementList (seems to be a special case): serialized as JSON array 

Das ist definitiv noch nicht ausgereift sondern nur ein erster Gedanke von mir. Wäre interessant zu schauen ob man das zu einer brauchbaren Definition aufbohren kann, dafür habe ich allerdings nicht die Ressourcen.

Author: see [comment ](https://github.com/admin-shell-io/aas-specs/pull/375#discussion_r1551038092)above: you require definitions for "complex type" etc. but here you also do not provide definitions, just a (complete) list of elements that needs to be maintained.

Reviewer: You are right, the proposed changes are not helping. 
My idea was to make this table shorter by not repeating elements where regular serialization and valueOnly serialization are the same, e.g. Blob, File, Reference(?). Only the types in the category I called `composite` need to be explained further.

The current proposal just adds complexity without real benefit so I am against it. Either keep it as it was previously, i.e. a table of all element types listed explicitly or try to go the way I proposed and find a way to shorten that table by re-using previous definitions (e.g. default serialization for some elements)

Author: Sorry, this was your proposal to go. Sounded more easy than it is. If you have something different in mind then please  provide a proposal for the simplified table.

Reviewer: My proposal was not to just add subheadings to the table without any kind of explanation what that mean or why they are there. I already provided different categories than you used and also included description/reasoning for each category.

    
[source,json,linenums]
----
5000
----
    
====

* If the submodel element has no attribute with name "value" then the attributes that are value-related need to be explicitly identified as such, for example by a table as defined in xref:table-value-data-attributes[]. These attributes are part of the serialization with their name, the name being the value of the attribute "idShort". 

====
EXAMPLE: 
For a _SubmodelElementCollection_ named "ExampleFamily" with four string attributes "NameOfMother", "NameOfFather" and "NameOfSon" of type "Property" and one attribute "CalculateAge" of type "Operation", the Value-Only JSON payload is minimized to the following,
i.e. the name of the SubmodelElementCollection is not part of the Value-Only serialization and attribute "CalculateAge" is ignored:
    
[source,json,linenums]
----
{
    "NameOfMother": "Martha ExampleFamily",
    "NameOfFather": "Jonathan ExampleFamily",
    "NameOfSon": "Clark ExampleFamily"
}
----
    
====

* Submodel is an exception. Its attribute "submodelElements" is treated like the attribute "value" of a submodel element collection.

> * For complex types the serialization is identical to the "Normal"-format serialization. If this is not the case its serialization needs to be explicitly defined.

Reviewer: What exactly is a `complex type`?

Author: not in text any longer

* Submodel elements defined in the submodel other than the ones mentioned above are not subject to serialization of that SerializationModifier.

The following rules shall be adhered to when serializing a submodel element different than a submodel with the SerializationModifier _Value_:

> * The submodel element is serialized as an unnamed JSON object.

Reviewer: This statement is wrong, as to my understanding, a property should be serialized only as its value, e.g. `"some string property value"`. This is obviously not a JSON object but still valid JSON (see https://www.json.org/)

> * A submodel element is considered a leaf submodel element if it does not contain other submodel elements. A leaf submodel element follows the rules for the different submodel elements considered in the serialization, as described for a submodel above. If it is not a leaf element, the serialization rules must be transitively followed until the value is a leaf submodel element.

Reviewer: > A leaf submodel element follows the rules for the different submodel elements considered in the serialization, as described for a submodel above
This is also not correct, as the section above defined a property to be serialized as `${Property/idShort}: ${Property/value}` but in fact it should just `${Property/value}`.

I think we are making things much more complicated than they are by differentiating between leaf and non-leaf elements. What is wrong about just making a "recursive" definition, e.g. 

Property is serialized as 
> ${Property/Value}

SubmodelElementCollection is serialized as
> {
   "${SubmodelElement/idShort}": valueOnly(${SubmodelElement})    // for each submodel element in the collection
}

etc?

This would cover all cases at once and reduce the complexity of this whole section drastically.

> Optional submodel elements are omitted if not specified for the requesting submodel or submodel element.

Reviewer: What does that even mean? Either they are part of the serialization or not. What would be an example for this rule to apply that is not covered by other rules/definitions?

> Optional submodel elements are omitted if not specified for the requesting submodel or submodel element.

Author: ```suggestion
A submodel element is omitted if no value is defined for it for the requesting submodel or submodel element.
```

}
----

> With the SerializationModifier set to _Value,_ the payload within a submodel or structured submodel element is minimized to the following:

Reviewer: What is a **structured** submodel element? Is it something with children, i.e. a non-leaf element?

}
----

> If the property itself is the subject for ValueOnly the serialization is minimized to the following:

Author: True, will be corrected

[source,json,linenums]
----
{
  5000
}
----

> For a _SubmodelElementCollection_, the struct is serialized within a submodel or structured submodel element as objects denoted by curly brackets:

Reviewer: again, what is a **structured** submodel element?

Author: one that is no leaf element, might be inconsistent

Author: sorry, a structured element do have child elements. SMC and SML

Author: reformulated, structured submodel element not used any longer in text

}
----

If the _SubmodelElementList_ itself is the subject for ValueOnly the serialization is minimized to the following:

[source,json,linenums]
----

>  [

Reviewer: FYI, previously it stated that everything is serialized as a JSON object - this is not a JSON object but a JSON array. They are considered different things in JSON.

    "Martha ExampleFamily",
    "Jonathan ExampleFamily",
    "Clark ExampleFamily"
]

> ----

Author: This seems not to be correct since e.g. collections within a list do not have idShorts but this would be requested here.

|===

The following types defined by the XSD and RDF specifications are explicitly omitted for serialization. This is ensured because they are not part of enumerations xref:IDTA-01001_Metamodel_DataTypes.adoc#[DataTypeDefXsd] and xref:IDTA-01001_Metamodel_DataTypes.adoc#[DataTypeDefRdf]:

xs:language, xs:normalizedString, xs:token, xs:NMTOKEN, xs:Name, xs:NCName, xs:QName, xs:ENTITY, xs:ID, xs:IDREF, xs:NOTATION, xs:IDREFS, xs:ENTITIES, xs:NMTOKENS, rdf:HTML and rdf:XMLLiteral.

====

> Note 1: due to the limits in the representation of numbers in JSON, the maximum integer number that can be used without losing precision is 2⁵³-1 (defined as Number.MAX_SAFE_INTEGER). Even if the used data type would allow higher or lower values, they cannot be used if they cannot be represented in JSON. Affected data types are unbounded numeric types xs:decimal, xs:integer, xs:positiveInteger, xs:nonNegativeInteger, xs:negativeInteger, xs:nonPositiveInteger and the bounded type xs:unsignedLong. Other numeric types are not affected. footnote:[cf. https://eclipse-esmf.github.io/samm-specification/2.0.0/datatypes.html (with adjustments for +/-INF, NaN, and language-typed literal support)]

Reviewer: I am not an expert, but where is `Number.MAX_SAFE_NUMBER` defined? This seems to be implementation-specific, i.e. depend on the runtime/framework/programming language used. JSON itself does not define any boundaries for numbers. Please provide are clearer explanation and/or a source.

Author: Link from ESMF: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Number/MAX_SAFE_INTEGER added + link corrected

Reviewer: The provided link does not back what is claimed here. First, it has no connection at all to JSON; the word JSON is not even mentioned in the linked document. Second, it explicitly says in the first sentence, that this only applies to JavaScript.
Please add a source (or at least detailed explanation) for the following statement 
> due to the limits in the representation of numbers in JSON, the maximum integer number that can be used without losing precision is 2⁵³-1 

I am not against having this statement per-se, but as I never have heard of this and currently don't understand why this would be the case I think this requires proof.

}
----

> If the _Reference_ itself is the subject for ValueOnly the serialization is minimized to the following:

Reviewer: This comment is actually on unchanged line 313, the expected result for serializing a ReferenceElement.

This serialization is wrong as it still contains the idShort of the element, while it should only contain the value, i.e. I would expect

````JSON
{
    "type": "ExternalReference",
    "keys": [
        {
            "type": "GlobalReference",
            "value": "0173-1#02-BAA120#008"
        }
    ]
}
```

[source,json,linenums]

> [source,json,linenums]

Reviewer: duplicate of line 327? I am not an expert on AsciiDoc but it looks like an error.

  }
}
----
 

> If the _Blob_ itself is the subject for ValueOnly the serialization for Extent set to *_WithBlobValue_  is minimized to the following:

Reviewer: What is the result if extent is set to WithoutBlobValue?

}
----

If the _RelationshipElementAnnotation_ itself is the subject for ValueOnly the serialization is minimized to the following:

[source,json,linenums]
----
{
    "first": {
      "type": "ModelReference",
      "keys": [
        {
          "type": "Submodel",
          "value": "http://customer.com/demo/aas/1/1/1234859590"
        },
        {
          "type": "Property",
          "value": "PlusPole"
        }
      ]
    },
    "second": {
      "type": "ModelReference",
      "keys": [
        {
          "type": "Submodel",
          "value": "http://customer.com/demo/aas/1/0/1234859123490"
        },
        {
          "type": "Property",
          "value": "MinusPole"
        }
      ]
    },

>     "annotation": [

Reviewer: This maybe needs an explanation...I that the annotation points to a SubmodelElementCollection that, in-turn, contains a single Property of type String with value "TechnicalCurrentFlowDirection". 
Not sure if the original model, i.e. not serialized with content=value but with content=normal is in the document so the reader can understand this.

Author: But the example states that the annotation is a Property, not a Collection... the property is not part of a collection. But you are right: annotations is treated like SubmodelElementCollection w.r.t. its serialization. This text could be added.

>     "annotation": [

Author: ```suggestion
    "annotations": [
```

}
----

If the _Entity_ itself is the subject for ValueOnly the serialization is minimized to the following:

[source,json,linenums]
----
{
    "statements": {
      "MaxRotationSpeed": 5000
    },

>     "entityType": "SelfManagedEntity",

Reviewer: Is this really part of what is considered the **value** of an Entity? I would expect it to be considered metadata are therefore excluded from valueOnly serialization.

        },
        {
          "type": "Property",
          "value": "MaxRotation"
        }
      ]
    }
}
----

> ==== JSON-Schema for the ValueOnly-Serialization

Reviewer: The JSON Schema (which was not changed, i.e. I cannot make a comment on that during review) includes elements that are not defined in the meta model/part 1, namely `OperationRequestValueOnly` and `OperationResultValueOnly`.
These should not be part of this document but there should be a section in part 2 adding to this JSON schema for classes added in part 2 meta model.

Author: true

}
----

If the _BasicEventElement_ itself is the subject for ValueOnly the serialization is minimized to the following:

[source,json,linenums]
----
{

>     "observed": {

Reviewer: Is *observed* the only property that is considered **value** of a BasicEventElement? If so, why do we need that extra JSON object to wrap around and not simplify the serialization to
```JSON
{
     "type": "ModelReference",
      "keys": [
        {
          "type": "Submodel",
          "value": "http://customer.com/demo/aas/1/1/1234859590"
        },
        {
          "type": "Property",
          "value": "CurrentValue"
        }
      ]
    }
```

Author: If we would extend it by other (optional) value-attributes then the serialization would not be valid any longer

Author: It would not be backward-compatible to change this. So it needs to stay like this. If you want to change it please raise an issue for R4.0.
